# 2. Getting stakeholder buy-in

In order for a threat modeling culture to achieve its goals of reducing risk and increasing security, sufficient buy-in from all stakeholders is crucial. To achieve this, the following challenges typically arise :

1. Alleviating concerns that the stakeholders have around adopting threat modeling as part of the SDLC.
2. Acquiring threat modeling expertise.
3. Getting management support by demonstrating the return on investment.

As these three elements are important to get management buy-in and commitment to govern (part of) the companies cyber risks through threat modeling, let us look at them in more detail:

## 2.1 Alleviating concerns with stakeholders

Introducing change to a familiar way of working requires appropriate change management and introducing threat modeling to an existing SDLC is no exception. One of the first hurdles to take in gaining stakeholder support is helping them overcome any reluctance they might have to threat modeling activities. A good place to start is to develop a clear understanding of *their perception* of their concerns, and what they see as potential obstacles to investing in the creation of threat models. 
 
The following overview lists typical stakeholders in a software development process together with a few of their most common concerns. Most are shared; some are specific to one role:

| Stakeholder       | Reservations and objections they may have against threat modeling|
| :-------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| **Management** | <ul><li> The added value of threat modeling is not immediately apparent (especially when the practice of threat modeling is new for their organization).</li><li>There is no desire to have all potential threats made explicit, as this awareness creates the responsibility to address them.</li><li>Time of valuable team members needs to be allocated to work on the threat model, driving up the cost and potentially causing delays in other, more urgent activities.</li></ul> |
| **The application owner / Product Owner** | <ul><li> The added value of threat modeling is not immediately apparent (especially when the practice of threat modeling is new for their organization).</li><li>There is no desire to have all potential threats made explicit, as this awareness creates the responsibility to address them.</li><li>Adding a potentially long list of risk mitigations to an already strict roadmap increases the risk of derailing the project entirely.</li><li>Time needs to be allocated to work on the threat model, driving up the cost and potentially causing delays in other, more urgent activities.</li></ul>|
| **The project manager / Scrum Master** | <ul><li> The added value of threat modeling is not immediately apparent (especially when the practice of threat modeling is new for their organization).</li><li>Adding a potentially long list of risk mitigations to an already strict roadmap increases the risk of derailing the project entirely.</li><li>Time needs to be allocated to work on the threat model, driving up the cost and potentially causing delays in other, more urgent activities.</li></ul> |
| **The architect** | <ul><li> The added value of threat modeling is not immediately apparent (especially when the practice of threat modeling is new for their organization).</li><li>The threat modeling exercise feels like an "exam": An external person/team is reviewing the architecture and there to scrutinize their (lack of) security knowledge.</li><li>Time needs to be allocated to work on the threat model, driving up the cost and potentially causing delays in other, more urgent activities.</li></ul> |
| **The developer(s)** | <ul><li> The added value of threat modeling is not immediately apparent (especially when the practice of threat modeling is new for their organization).</li><li>The threat modeling exercise feels like an "exam": An external team person/is reviewing the code and there to scrutinize their (lack of) secure coding skills.</li><li>Time needs to be allocated to work on the threat model, driving up the cost and potentially causing delays in other, more urgent activities.</li></ul> |
| **The security and/or DevOps engineer** | <ul><li> The added value of threat modeling is not immediately apparent (especially when the practice of threat modeling is new for their organization).</li><li>The threat modeling exercise feels like an "exam": An person/external team is reviewing the infrastructure/pipelines and there to scrutinize their (lack of) security knowledge.</li><li>Time needs to be allocated to work on the threat model, driving up the cost and potentially causing delays in other, more urgent activities.</li></ul> |



To defuse some of these arguments and convince the stakeholders that threat modeling is also in *their* best interest, it is important to listen to their concerns and acknowledge them. Below is the same list of stakeholders with counterarguments that can help drive this conversation:


| Stakeholder       | Potential gains that come with threat modeling   |
| :-------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| **Management**               |  <ul><li>Engaging in threat modeling allows them to demonstrate that their company is taking a proactive stance towards cyber security, which can be useful as part of achieving security-related certification (ISO27000, SOC 2, PCI, ...) and/or GDPR compliance through the principles of "privacy and security by design". </li><li>Having an explicit list of risks (a.k.a. a "Risk Register") enables the company's CISO to execute a risk-based approach in their security management strategy (i.e., prioritizing mitigation of risks based on their individual severities).</li></ul>|
| **The application owner / Product Owner** |   <ul><li>Given the aforementioned risk-based approach, the application's owner can assign priorities based on a methodical approach, rather than gut feeling.</li><li>A threat modeling exercise is an ideal way to get all stakeholders on the same page, ensuring that there is a coherent view on security.</li><li>The threat model can serve as a means to request additional security budget.</li></ul>|
| **The project manager / Scrum Master** | <ul><li>Given the aforementioned risk-based approach, the application's owner can assign priorities based on a methodical approach, rather than gut feeling.</li><li>A threat modeling exercise is an ideal way to get all stakeholders on the same page, ensuring that there is a coherent view on security.</li><li>The threat model can serve as a means to request additional security budget.</li></ul> |
| **The architect**              | <ul><li>The goal of a threat model is to provide constructive advice on improving the application's resilience against cyber attacks.</li><li>Threat modeling exercises usually lead to reusable architectural design patterns that may be beneficial to other parts of the application, and/or other application domains.</li></ul> |
| **The developer(s)**              | <ul><li>The goal of a threat model is to provide constructive advice on improving the application's resilience against cyber attacks.</li><li>Creating a threat model has the positive side-effect of educating developers about how hackers go about the specific attacks that "their" programming language and development framework can be vulnerable to.</li><li>The threat model can serve as a means to request additional security budget (e.g., secure coding training).</li></ul> |
| **The security and/or DevOps engineer** | <ul><li>The goal of a threat model is to provide constructive advice on improving the application's resilience against cyber attacks.</li><li>Creating a threat model has the positive side-effect of educating operations engineers about how hackers go about the specific attacks that "their" infrastructure, build systems and runtime stack can be vulnerable to.</li><li>The threat model can serve as a means to request additional security budget (e.g., security specific training).</li></ul> |

## 2.2	Introducing threat modeling expertise

A second ingredient to succeed at threat modeling is relevant expertise. As we will see in Chapter 4, there is great importance of finding a threat modeling specialist and training people. In order to obtain the relevant expertise, there are three approaches you can take:

### *a. The do-it-yourself-approach (or "DIY" approach)*

In organizations that are just starting out with threat modeling, one option is to start acquiring threat modeling expertise through self-study by reading books and consulting online resources. This approach can seem attractive when:
- the current need for threat modeling is low
- the stakeholders are not entirely convinced of the use of threat modeling and first want to see a low-cost proof-of-concept in their specific business setting
- no extensive budget is available to fund a threat modeling program.

The advantages of this approach are :
- Speed (It can start right away and does not take a lot of preparation)
- Budget

The downsides, however, can be more serious:
- The practice of threat modeling can be challenging when you are just starting out, especially for people without prior expertise in cyber security and risk rating. 
- A failed first attempt can create a negative bias towards the concept of threat modeling with other stakeholders, which may undermine their willingness to invest further in cultivating a threat modeling culture. (i.e., "We tried that once and concluded it doesn't work for our company")
- This approach does not scale well for larger organizations.

Therefore, the recommendation is to only start with this DIY-approach if the people involved have some prior security exposure, and there is a willingness to experiment (and possibly fail). 

In other cases, the following two alternatives are worth considering:

### *b. Hiring an expert*

A good, fairly lightweight way to start adopting a threat modeling approach, is to have a first threat model done by an expert, in close collaboration with your team. This way, the stakeholders get to see how threat modeling is done correctly, increasing the odds of the first threat model becoming a success.

The advantages of this approach are 
- There is a significantly lower risk than the DIY approach
- It can create more willingness to adopt a broader threat modeling approach in a fairly short time. 
- It scales reasonably well, as the same expert can be hired to perform follow-up threat models for other applications/teams.

The downsides of this approach are:

- More budget is required when compared to the DIY-approach
- It does not automatically scale to large organizations with tens or hundreds of applications in their portfolio.

Therefore, hiring an expert should be considered by organizations that are just starting out with threat modeling and want to get some experience, or small organizations with only a few applications in their portfolio. For larger organizations that want to systematically adopt threat modeling throughout various teams, external threat modeling training programs are more suitable.

### *c. Organizing threat modeling training*

With a threat modeling training program, a trainer is hired to educate an initial core team of people on the practice of threat modeling. Ideally, the trainees are highly motivated people that can subsequently take up the role of threat modeling specialists (or even evangelists) within the organization.

The advantages of this approach are:
- It scales well (you can train more people as the need for threat modeling specialists increases)
- It has the highest chance for success that your organization is able to fully adopt and internalize threat modeling.

The downsides:
- It takes some time before tangile results are produced. After the training, threat models should  be created in the context of the companies software projects. 
- It requires a larger up-front investment, which could be perceived as a risky budget decision for organizations in which threat modeling has not proven its value yet.

## 2.3 Demonstrating return on investment to achieve management commitment

Lastly, an extremely important aspect of setting up a sustainable threat modeling initiative within an organization is to demonstrate return on investment (ROI) and get management commitment. A threat modeling approach is only able to show ROI if it results in a demonstrable improvement of the security of the organization or its products.

To show that the threat modeling activities have a positive ROI, mitigations and recommendations made in a threat model should have the following attributes:

### *a. Clearly documented and visible to the relevant stakeholders*
Lacking either clarity or visibility, a demonstrable change cannot be achieved. Also note that, rather than implementing new tools and/or processes, using those that are already accepted in the company culture is a preferred approach. Whichever tools are already in use for sprint plannings and daily standups can usually accommodate for documenting threat modeling artefacts and resulting work as well.

### *b. Realistic and implementable*
If the recommendations exceed the timing, budget, expertise, or other constraints of a project, they will not effect change and not lead to ROI. It is crucial that the threat modeler has a good understanding of the project constraints as well as the company's risk appetite before making recommendations. Whenever possible, the threat modeler should also be willing and able to offer alternatives if the ideal solution is not feasible on the short term. This may include a quick-fix and a long term mitigation plan.

### *c. Measurable*
When mitigative actions are clearly linked to development artefacts it is easier to track the level of their effects and adoption throughout the SDLC. The sheer number of artefacts (e.g. user stories, bug fixes, JIRA tickets, ...) and/or number of story points burnt on implementing them can be good metrics to measure the efficacy of the threat modeling efforts. 

Finally, to show that the change is positive, the changes effected by threat modeling should be linked to the number of security bugs or incidents that are reported after go-live of the system that was threat modeled. An important consideration is to distinguish between the number of security issues that are reported as a direct result of threat modeling (this number should be high!) and the number of security issues that are reported after the fact (this number should go down). By making it clear that threat modeling is responsible for detecting and fixing more security issues proactively, you can clearly show ROI.

[<< Previous page](1.%20Introduction.md) | [Main page](../README.md) | [Next page >>](3.%20Embed%20in%20your%20organization.md)
| --- | --- | --- |